hi I'm Ben and this is the house I built
out of shipping containers now I've been
interested in shipping container
architecture for quite some time but I
had a really hard time finding good
information about how to get building
permits or how much would it cost well
we did the research we documented
everything that we did and now we're so
excited to share with you what we
learned so check it out this is episode
1 where we'll talk about buying
containers getting building permits and
pouring a concrete foundation in the
spring of 2018 I bought 10 acres of land
in Joshua Tree California it's a square
piece of land about 650 by 650 feet and
it has this nice little mountain right
in the middle while I was waiting for
the surveyor to finish up the site
drawings I went ahead and ordered two
shipping containers no I had heard like
a lot of people have that you can get
shipping containers for really cheap but
in California you have to use a one trip
conditioned container if you're turning
it into a permitted house this is just
so that you can provide documentation
for what's been inside the container
just to ensure that there hasn't been
any radioactive or toxic stuff in there
I also didn't order typical containers I
ordered hi cubes which were a foot
taller than a standard shipping
container this is gonna give me more
room for insulation running wiring and
of course because we're in California
sprinkler systems for fire suppression
originally I was only planning on using
one 40-foot container to build one tiny
house but then I thought it'd be really
nice to have a guest bedroom and
bathroom for visitors and then when I
checked in with my local building
department they informed me that there
was a 700 square foot minimum for houses
which meant I would have to add a third
container so I figured a home office and
workshop would be great now even before
I got the permit I was allowed to move
up to 50 cubic yards of soil so I went
ahead and started flattening out the
piece where I wanted to place the house
I rented a bulldozer and hired an
operator to flatten out this whole area
and it only took him two days we then
started digging for the monolithic slabs
which are going to support the
containers
originally we tried to do this with hand
tools but there was so much rock in the
soil was really slow going so we let the
machine do the work and do we just use
hand tools to clean it up afterwards
not only are there big chunks of rock
mixed into the soil
there's hole veins of stone that go
through it we use to buy lumber to
define the perimeter of the slab and we
drove stakes into the ground to hold
these boards in place wood stakes kept
breaking so we switched to these steel
stakes that already had holes in them
for screws and they worked really well
[Music]
we had a whole bunch of 20-foot long
pieces of rebar delivered to the site
and we began to reinforcement for the
concrete the structural engineer had
specified the size of the rebar and the
layout so all we had to do was follow
those drawings and wire it all together
I focused on cutting all the short
vertical pieces while the rest of the
crew wired them all together this isn't
the most difficult work but it does help
to have a plan the whole thing starts to
get pretty heavy because you're
basically creating one big steel cage of
rebar all wired together
[Music]
we spread out the 10-millimeter moisture
barrier and then shoveled clean sand on
the top of that I had always wondered
how builders keep the rebar from just
falling to the bottom of the formwork
and they use these things called Dobies
they're just little concrete blocks with
wires embedded in them and they act as
spacers this was a lot of work in
hundred degree weather and it really
made me appreciate all the stuff that
goes on inside a monolithic piece of
concrete originally we planned on
embedding all of the drain pipes for the
plumbing into the concrete slab but
after laying out all the pieces and
wrestling around trying to get them in
the right position relative to the rebar
we just felt we weren't gonna be
accurate enough to line it up with
exactly where the container would need
to be so we just switched it out for a
simpler option and just made the final
drain go through the slab this just
means we'll have to do the plumbing
within the floor of the container itself
now this is as far as we can go before
having the building permits we certainly
can't pour any concrete until we get the
final sign-off California is a pretty
regulation intensive state and here's
the process we had to go through the
process starts with getting the site
surveyed in addition to measuring and
marking out the topographical features
which is really useful for showing how
the site will drain the surveyor also
researches the history of the site and
defines all the boundaries and setbacks
next up came the preliminary
architectural design where we laid out
all the spaces and features this design
then goes to the structural engineer who
creates a set of structural details and
performs calculations to prove that this
building will meet all the code
requirements the building department
gave us the option of either having the
architect or engineer stamp the drawings
we then compiled these designs into the
construction documents and added in a
whole series of reports and studies and
forms that are all required by San
Bernardino County
is a complicated and expensive process
because with each step you often have to
go back to the previous one and have
those drawings or documents updated all
right done with permits time to have
some fun and it's concrete day we have
three separate slabs and the smallest
one is inaccessible for a truck to pull
all the way up to so we're gonna have to
pump the concrete the crew got there a
few hours ahead of the trucks just to
make sure everything was good with the
forms and to spray them down with water
the first truck pulled up to the pump
and started releasing concrete into the
hopper
it then gets pumped through the hose and
delivered into the forms
there was only the few guys standing
around with shovels fill in the gaps
with the form with dirt and rocks as the
concrete levels rose this wasn't
exciting but a little bit stressful
today because you have to order all the
trucks in advance and they kept coming
about 15 minutes apart so we had to make
sure we were emptying one so that we'd
be ready for the next one
the gray plastic pipes that are sticking
up out of the forms are PVC conduit that
will allow us to run electrical lines
between the containers now the majority
of these slabs are going to be covered
by the containers but we still had them
smoothed out a bit pretty other slabs
the trucks could just back all the way
up and the concrete could just come
right down the chute
[Music]
altogether we used about six trucks and
45 yards of concrete
in addition to smoothing out the top
surface the guys also created some lines
through the surface of the concrete
these are to create control joints which
will allow for more expansion and
contraction of the concrete without
creating unwanted cracks we also use
some plywood boxes to create some
openings in the slab and this is just
giving us a little bit more room to line
up where the drain for the toilet goes
the last thing we did was to use an
edging tool to do a little bit of a
round over at the edges of each slab so
the most common question I've gotten so
far is why did I choose to do a slab on
grade Foundation and I get it it seems
like an awful lot of concrete for a
container which is self-supporting well
slap one grade isn't the first choice
that I had I originally wanted to do
sort of a pier Foundation and I was very
concerned with how I would level it
since I don't have a lot of experience
sort of setting these things and so I
was interested in doing some concrete
piers with a steel beam that I could
then level on site that I would weld the
container to so that I sketched it out
and sent it to the structural engineers
well they were initially worried about
lateral support considering seismic
activity were in California we have to
worry about earthquakes and with seismic
activity you have to worry about the
lateral load of the foundation not just
about how it takes weight straight down
so we then worked on a second version of
this design where we connected the
footings underneath the concrete columns
so that it creates sort of a ring and
that add would add enough strength and
stability but when I talked to the
building department they said that this
would be classified as a crawlspace or
at least at the area underneath the
container would and if that was the case
it would have to be at least 18 inches
between the bottom of the container and
the finished dirt and the container
floor itself is pretty thick and so I
didn't want to have my finished floor to
be almost two to two-and-a-half feet off
of the ground because then if I do any
decks or staircases out I have to have
all these rail
which blocked the views so at this point
considering both the challenges for what
it was originally a really simple
foundation adding in seismic support and
then and knowing that I'd have to raise
the finished floor way off the ground I
scrapped this idea and started thinking
about monolithic concrete foundations
now first I said well can I just do a
perimeter beam that goes all the way
around it doesn't really need to have a
concrete top right like the containers
only sitting on those edges so the
engineers worked it out but that
concrete ridge beam because again it
doesn't have the lateral support from
the actual top of the slab what had to
be pretty thick so it ended up not being
that much more concrete than just doing
an entire slab and when you actually
look at how much concrete is per yard it
was like a cost difference of like a
hundred dollars per slab now that
doesn't mean the slab is the best idea
I'm sure there's a lot of other
foundation types that would have worked
on but with what we were working on here
with this particular building department
and maybe just the limitations of our
structural engineering firm this is what
seem to make the most sense across the
most basis ease even though it didn't
really seem perfect for any one thing
now my architecture firms in Boston on
the East Coast and a lot of our work is
out there so we're used to doing
basements or foundations that go well
below the frost line but out here in
Southern California that's less of a
concern so at least we had that going
for us which made the foundation a lot
easier and relatively affordably priced
I know there's a lot of Engineers
architects and builders out there in the
audience so let me know in the comments
section below what you think would work
or would have worked better for this
type of foundation also any little
tricks or tips that you might have for
the rest of the audience about
foundation design form work what to
consider when doing big concrete pours
like that would also be appreciated so I
hope that clears it up why we ended up
going with a slab on grade foundation I
know when you see houses like this a lot
so many decisions seem arbitrary and I'm
looking at architecture all the time
being like why did they do that but
before you sort of assume that
somebody's dumb although probably
plenty of other reasons to do so ask
them why because there's always these
other considerations that we may not see
just by looking at the photograph on the
next episode of the modern home project
we're in a renault crane moved the
containers and start cutting out the
holes for the windows and doors make
sure you subscribe to this channel and
turn on notifications so you don't miss
an episode we'll be posting additional
information including the architectural
drawings on our website thanks for
watching and follow us on Instagram if
you want to see what we're working on
next